
মনোয়ারুল ইসলাম, সহকারী অধ্যাপক, ঢাকা স্টেট কলেজ, ঢাকাপ্রিয় শিক্ষার্থীরা, আজ তোমাদের জন্য ইংরেজি ২য় পত্রের ১ নং প্রশ্ন অর্থাৎ Right Form of Verbs-এর কয়েকটি নিয়ম আলোচনা করব। আগে নিজে চেষ্টা করবে। তারপর উত্তরের সঙ্গে তা মিলিয়ে নেবে। Rule-37:As soon as-এর পরে দুটি Clause-ই Past Ind. Tense- এ হবে [As soon as +Past Ind.+Past Ind.](a) As soon as we (reach)—the station, the train (leave)—. Ans. As soon as we reached the station, the train left. (b) As soon as the students (come) — to college, the bell (ring) — . Ans. As soon as the students came to college, the bell rang. (c) As soon as we (start) — for college, the rain (start) — . Ans. As soon as we started for college, the rain started. Try yourself: (d) As soon as he (see) — me, he (run) — away swiftly. (e) As soon as the police (mark)—the thief, he (run)—away.
 Rule-38: Sentence এ যদি No sooner had-than থাকে তাহলে No sooner+past parfect+than+past Ind. হবে।(a) No sooner had the rain (stop) — than they (leave) — the shelter. Ans. No sooner had the rain stopped than they left the shelter. (b) No sooner had we (reach) — the station than the train (leave) —. Ans. No sooner had we reached the station than the train left. (c) No had the man (see) — than he (run) — away. Ans. No had the man seen than he ran away. Try yourself: (d) No sooner had the thief (see) — the police than the thief (flee) — away from the spot.(e) No sooner had we reached the college—the rain started.
 Rule-39: So that, in order that দ্বারা যুক্ত Sentence-এর একটি Clause-এর Verb Present Tense/Future Tense-এর হলে অপর Clause-এর Verb-এর পুর্বে Can/May বসে এবং Past Tense হলে could/might বসে।(a) He reads attentively so that he (stand) — first in the final examination. Ans. He reads attentively so that he can stand first in the final examination. (b) He read attentively so that he (stand) — first in the final examination. Ans. He read attentively so that he could stand first in the final examination. (c) He worked hard in order that he (build) — his good future. Ans. He worked hard in order that he could build his good future. Try yourself:(d) He will learn computer in order that he (get) — a satisfactory job. (e) He saved some money in order that he (buy) — some books.
 Rule-40 ‘Lest’ Conjunction দ্বারা Subordinate Clause যুক্ত হলে Principal Clause-এর Verb যে Tense-ই থাকুক না কেন Subordinate Clause-এর Subject-এর পরে Should বসে।(a) Read attentively lest you (fail) — in the final examination. Ans. Read attentively lest you should fail in the final examination. (b) He went away lest you (see) — him. Ans. He went away lest you should see him. (c) He will return fast lest he (fall) — in danger. Ans. He will return fast lest he should fall in danger. Try yourself: (d) The officer was sympathetic to the boy lest he (go)—away. (e) The housewives are very conscious about the maid-servants lest they (leave) — them.# পরবর্তী অংশ ছাপা হবে আগামীকাল
